---
title: "Software User Facilities"
date: 2021-09-10T10:57:59-04:00
draft: false
---

There are user facilities for scientific research. They were born out of the cost of doing “big
science” with hardware that was increasingly resource-intensive, in terms of physical space,
personnel time, and materials. Lawrence’s first cyclotron fit in the palm of his hand. Then he
needed the hills behind Berkeley’s university campus. Today, to do effective and interesting
particle physics research, you need a facility (CERN’s LHC) that spans three national borders.

PIs still allocate portions of grant money to develop and procure small-footprint hardware in their
labs. They still apply for larger grants as co-PIs for larger-footprint hardware. But lots of
specialized hardware is maintained in user facilities. PIs apply to use these facilities and to get
some allocation of its support staff to help operate its inventory of instruments.

Imagine hardware user facilities that don't actually support and maintain the specialized
instruments. Rather, they are more like "water and power" facilities that provide pipes and hookups
and outlets and floor space where researchers can build, operate, and maintain their domain-specific
instruments. This is typically the case with scientific-computing user facilities, or of scientific
computing services within lab IT departments.

More and more "big science" is both compute- and data-intensive, being done with "big data" and what
might be termed "big software", domain-specific scientific instruments that are increasingly
resource-intensive to develop, support, and maintain/extend. However, it's hard to contend with the
lack of concrete physicality of software. With software, cathedrals (or bazaars) are built in the
mind.

User facilities are measured not by the publications/research they output directly, but by the
research they enable, by the citations of research products that used facility resources, typically
to synthesize, transform, and characterize physical samples. In typical user facilities, hardware
comes and goes -- the sample is central, portable from instrument to instrument. I believe that
analogous software user facilities must be data-centric: specific software instruments
(applications) come and go, whereas data is the thing that is synthesized, transformed, and
characterized by various domain-specific tools.

What has been your experience with emerging software user facilities or their analogue in your
domain, with resource environments pre-allocated by your organization to reduce the waste of
individual or small groups of PIs spending a portion of study-grant allocations on functionally
equivalent domain-specific software and data systems?

{{< subscribe >}}